.TH BACA 1 "July 2026" "baca 0.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
baca \- terminal ebook reader and library
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B baca
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ path | url | history-number | search-terms ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B baca
is a native C23 terminal reader for EPUB, EPUB3, MOBI, AZW, PDF, FB2,
TXT, Markdown, CBZ, CBR, CB7, PNG, JPEG, GIF, WebP, BMP, and SVG files.
Running it without arguments opens the reading library. Reading position,
bookmarks, and history are stored automatically.
.PP
When a library path is configured, Baca indexes it in-process with the bundled
FFF search library. Calibre libraries are detected by their metadata.db file
and displayed as authors, books, and grouped formats. EPUB is preferred when a
book has multiple formats.
.PP
HTTP and HTTPS documents are downloaded into a private cache and can be
reopened offline. URL credentials are rejected, TLS verification is enabled,
and downloads are limited to 256 MiB.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h , " " \-\-help
Print command help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v , " " \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-d , " " \-\-doctor
Print runtime paths and report whether MOBI/AZW support is available.
.TP
.BR \-r , " " \-\-history
Print reading history and exit.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I path
Open a local ebook, document, comic archive, or image.
.TP
.I url
Open an HTTP or HTTPS document URL.
.TP
.I history-number
Open a one-based row from reading history.
.TP
.I search-terms
Open the best fuzzy match across history path, title, and author fields.
.SH READER KEYS
.TP
.BR j , " " k , " arrows"
Scroll down or up.
.TP
.BR Ctrl-f , " " Ctrl-b , " PageDown , " PageUp
Move by pages.
.TP
.BR gg , " " G
Jump to the beginning or end. A numeric prefix jumps to a layout line.
.TP
.BR / , " " ? , " " n , " " N
Search forward or backward and repeat matches.
.TP
.BR b , " " B
Save a bookmark or open the bookmark list.
.TP
.BR Ctrl-o , " " Ctrl-i
Move backward or forward through jump history.
.TP
.BR Tab , " " M , " " F1
Open the table of contents, metadata, or help.
.TP
.BR q , " Esc"
Cancel the current action or quit.
.SH LIBRARY KEYS
.TP
.BR Enter , " " l
Open the selected document.
.TP
.BR j , " " k , " arrows"
Move the selection.
.TP
.B /
Fuzzy-filter the configured library with FFF.
.TP
.B a
Switch between the author shelf and all books.
.TP
.B f
Show every available format for the selected book.
.TP
.BR Backspace , " " Esc , " " h
Move to the parent shelf or clear the active filter.
.TP
.B s
Cycle recent, title, and author sorting.
.TP
.B r
Refresh and remove missing local files. URL entries are retained.
.TP
.B o
Open a local path or HTTP(S) URL.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/baca/config.ini
User configuration. Created with secure permissions on first use.
.IP
LibraryPath=auto checks ~/Calibre Library and ~/Documents/Calibre Library.
.TP
.I ~/.cache/baca/baca.db
SQLite reading history and bookmark database.
.TP
.I ~/.cache/baca/downloads/
Private persistent HTTP(S) document cache.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B BACA_LIBRARY_PATH
Override LibraryPath for the current process.
.SH DEPENDENCIES
MOBI and AZW-family files require
.B mobitool
from libmobi in
.BR PATH .
All other documented formats are handled by the linked native libraries.
.SH EXIT STATUS
Returns zero on success and nonzero for invalid arguments, unavailable
dependencies, corrupt or unsupported documents, and runtime failures.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR curl (1)
