.TH mereader-tui 1 "july 2026" "mereader-tui 0.1.1" "user commands"
.SH name
mereader-tui \- terminal ebook reader and calibre library manager
.SH synopsis
.B mereader-tui
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ path | url | history-number | search-terms ]
.SH description
.B mereader-tui
is a native c23 terminal reader for epub, epub3, pdf, fb2, txt, markdown,
cbz, cbr, cb7, png, jpeg, gif, webp, bmp, and svg files.
extractable, drm-free mobi, prc, azw, and azw3 files need
.BR mobitool (1).
running mereader-tui without arguments opens the library. reading position,
bookmarks, and history are stored automatically.
.PP
mereader-tui indexes a configured library in the same process with the bundled
fff search library. a directory that contains
.I metadata.db
is treated as a calibre library. the first shelf shows all logical books.
an author shelf and grouped format choices are also available. epub is
preferred when one book has several formats.
.PP
http and https documents are downloaded into a private cache and can be
reopened offline. urls with credentials are rejected, tls verification is
enabled, and each download is limited to 256 mib.
.SH options
.TP
.BR \-h , " " \-\-help
print command help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v , " " \-\-version
print the version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-d , " " \-\-doctor
print runtime paths and report whether mobi or azw support is available.
.TP
.BR \-r , " " \-\-history
print reading history and exit.
.SH arguments
.TP
.I path
open a local ebook, document, comic archive, or image.
.TP
.I url
open an http or https document url.
.TP
.I history-number
open a one-based row from reading history.
.TP
.I search-terms
open the best fuzzy match across history path, title, and author fields.
.SH reader keys
.TP
.BR j , " " k , " arrows"
scroll down or up.
.TP
.BR ctrl-f , " " ctrl-b , " " pagedown , " " pageup
move by pages.
.TP
.BR gg , " " G
jump to the beginning or end. a numeric prefix jumps to a layout line.
.TP
.BR / , " " f2
search forward or backward.
.TP
.BR n , " " N
repeat the search forward or backward.
.TP
.BR b , " " B
save a bookmark or open the bookmark list.
.TP
.BR ctrl-o , " " ctrl-i
move backward or forward through jump history.
.TP
.BR tab , " " M
open the table of contents or metadata.
.TP
.BR ? , " " f1
show every configured key.
.TP
.B f12
save the current terminal view as an svg file in the working directory.
.TP
.BR q , " " esc
cancel the current action or quit.
.SH library keys
.TP
.BR j , " " k , " arrows"
move the selection.
.TP
.BR ctrl-f , " " ctrl-b , " " pagedown , " " pageup
move by one screen.
.TP
.BR gg , " " G
select the first or last item.
.TP
.BR enter , " " l
open the selected item. an author opens that author's book shelf.
.TP
.B /
filter the current shelf with fff.
.TP
.B "space space"
open an independent book picker with cover and metadata details.
.TP
.B v
switch between list and card views.
.TP
.B a
switch between the all-books and author shelves.
.TP
.B f
show every available format for the selected book.
.TP
.BR backspace , " " esc , " " h
move to the parent shelf or clear the active filter.
.TP
.B s
cycle recent, title, and author sorting.
.TP
.B r
rescan the library and remove missing local files. url entries remain.
.TP
.B o
open a local path or http or https url.
.TP
.B ?
open or close library help.
.TP
.B q
quit the library.
.SH files
.TP
.I ~/.config/mereader-tui/config.ini
user configuration. created with secure permissions on first use.
.IP
.B LibraryPath=auto
checks
.I ~/Calibre Library
and
.IR ~/Documents/Calibre Library .
.TP
.I ~/.cache/mereader-tui/mereader-tui.db
sqlite reading history, bookmark, and library preference database.
.TP
.I ~/.cache/mereader-tui/downloads/
private persistent http and https document cache.
.SH environment
.TP
.B MEREADER_TUI_LIBRARY_PATH
override
.B LibraryPath
for the current process.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
change the config base directory. the default is
.IR ~/.config .
.TP
.B XDG_CACHE_HOME
change the cache base directory. the default is
.IR ~/.cache .
.SH dependencies
mobi and azw-family files need
.B mobitool
from libmobi in
.BR PATH .
the extracted book must be drm-free and convertible to epub. kindle print
replica and azw4 books are not supported. linked native libraries handle all
other documented formats.
.SH exit status
returns zero on success and nonzero for invalid arguments, unavailable
dependencies, corrupt or unsupported documents, and runtime failures.
.SH see also
.BR curl (1)
